Now that we took our first steps with the CSS grid,
let's apply some of the concepts you learned about
to our project
before we dive even deeper into the grid and into some other capabilities it offers to us.
So how could we add it to our project?
Later, I'll add it to this hosting page, to our form here
but one thing I want to do right now already, on every page, is I want to control the header, main area
and footer with the grid because if you have a look at our webpage here, we got one basic layout which
is the same on every page.
We got our header which is fixed of course, our main area and the footer and that is something we could
definitely implement with the help of the CSS grid.
So let's do that and let's do it in the shared.css file because it is the case on every page and
there,
I want to turn my body into a CSS grid, just as we did it previously in this module. I'll set the display
to grid here and if I save that and I now reload on that packages page, not a lot changed as you can
see,
the same is true on the main page here.
So this is a grid though, we can verify this
if we click on body, on the layout tab in the Firefox developer tools, here we can see it's a grid and
it is a grid with only two rows, with a big main row and that bottom row for the footer.
Now you might wonder where our backdrop, modal and the header and the navigation are,
these are all child elements of the body after all but it doesn't look like separate rows were created
for them.
Well, these are all elements that are positioned non-statically,
so the backdrop has a position of fixed, the modal has a position of fixed, the header has a position
of fixed and the navigation has a display of none here.
Now if we have such elements, then this essentially leads to them not being part of the grid.
If we shrink that and go to mobile view, then our navigation gets a position of fixed too,
so this also is not a part of the grid on mobile view
and that is something important to realize. Elements which are not part of the document flow,
so fixed and absolute elements are not part of the grid and hence, are not considered for the rows
and that is fine actually because here, we don't want that to be part of the grid,
I want to control the rest with my grid.
So our layout will actually not contain a header because the header is detached from the document flow,
it will just contain our main area and the footer.
Now one thing I want to do which we can see on for example the customers or packages page if we're not
zoomed in is I want to control the placement of the footer with the help of the grid.
Right now, we're doing this manually in our shared.css file, here in the main class,
we got our min height set and this works but with the grid, we can actually follow a different approach.
I can explicitly add two lines, so two rows I mean, with grid template rows.
Now the first row will be our main area
and there, I can set it to auto and the footer has a height of 8rem with all the things that are involved
in it,
so we can set the second row to 8rem.
Now let me remove or comment out the min height assignment here and let's reload the page.
Now what we can see is that the footer now is positioned differently,
the grid if we inspect it, still has this main area but then the bottom row here does contain the footer
but somehow this doesn't look right,
right?
So for example the main area goes beneath our header, now the reason for that simply is that our header is fixed.
Now here are two possible solutions,
for one we could add a padding top to our body element of 3.5rem to push the content below the
header basically.
Now if you inspect body, we can actually see that it is starting below our header, so this row starts
below our header here
but still we see, this doesn't seem to work
and the reason for this is the auto value for the first row. Auto simply takes as much space as required
by the content.
If we wanted to fill everything up, we would have to give our body a height of 100%
and the same for HTML to really make this work.
So now we if we add height 100% to both,
now this works, the same on the customers page because now we're basically saying that our grid takes
the entire height of the page,
it got a padding so that the content really starts only after the header and then we get two rows and the first
row is auto,
so it takes all the remaining space and the remaining space is essentially 100% minus the row height
for the footer and the cool thing is on the starting page where we got more content in the first row,
auto will also ensure that it doesn't crop this content.
So here, it's not just the remaining space of 100% minus the footer,
instead it's as much space as the content requires and the footer is
then added below that.
So now we got a way more elegant solution for our problem of having a footer which should always be
at the bottom whilst at the same time, ensuring that our main content has the place it needs.
And again for the header, it's important to understand since it's a fixed header, it's not part of the
document flow and therefore it doesn't need its separate row in the grid.
We could theoretically though also add a row here and remove padding top, so let me remove that here
and instead add a row with 3.5rem for the header.
Now this would basically destroy everything
because that first row would actually be occupied by our main content
and therefore, it looks ugly but we of course can specifically tell the main content into
which row it should go.
So we can go to the main selector here and add grid row here
and basically we want to start after the second row line,
the first one is at the very top,
the second one comes after the first row.
So in line two, we want to start and then we want to go down to the third line,
so we want to end before the third row line.
Now if we reload, we're back to where we were
but now the footer jumps ahead, well we can also change that by simply giving the footer a clear place,
so we can also take grid row down to our footer here and in the main footer class, we simply tell it to
start after line three and go to line four.
And now the footer is at the bottom,
also for packages, excuse me. and also for the main page
and if we go to mobile view,
this also looks all right to me,
yes.
So this is now a different solution,
now of course there's yet another way of solving this with template areas. In the body or on the body
tag, we can add grid template areas
and of course there, we also can assign names to our columns and rows.
Now we only got one column, so we only need one value per string
but now we can replicate our three row setup here with three strings which are beneath each other and
then the first row would be the header,
we can name it header or give it a dot to leave it empty but let's name it
header, then we can name this main and we can name this footer
and now this allows us to go to the main selector and now not select a place in the grid like this but
use grid area instead and target main here
and for the footer at the very bottom of course, there we also don't use grid row like this but grid
area and we target footer.
So that's yet another way of solving this
and as you can see, this also does the trick and works just fine. With that, you saw a couple of ways of
using the grid and positioning this, it's of course up to you which one you want to use,
I believe that this is easiest to grasp because you assign clear names to the different areas in your
page
but in the end, it's up to you and this is one example of how you can use the grid to solve a certain problem
more elegantly.